---
draft: "true"
---

# Lynx habitat analysis in the Southern Carpathians

A case study to promote basic understanding of wildlife habitat modeling
for students based on open source data.

## Introduction

Challenged with the task of GIS based modeling for the first time, a
working group of undergraduate forestry students of the University for
Sustainable Development Eberswalde (HNEE) conducted literature research
for habitat suitability and behavior of the Eurasian Lynx (*Lynx lynx*).
In the module 'Applied GIS in Natural Resource Management', under the
guidance of Prof. Mund, the students quickly discovered the subject's
complexity, especially within regard to the adaptability of species to
changing environments. With limited research published in English about
lynx habitat on the Romanian side, we continued the project based on
only freely available data sets and open-source software, aiming to
establish conceptual knowledge of habitat modeling, strengthening skills
on widely applied QGIS tools and to create a **basic expert model** in
the process.

## Methodology

All collected data was processed with QGIS 2.6 and 2.8, projected into
ETRS89 / ETRS-LAEA and stored according to the INSPIRE directive to meet
EU standards. An overall **discrete index of weights** was defined and
applied to all input data.

![Figure 1: Workflow - Lynx habitat expert
model](./images/europe_lynx1.png)

**Workflow description**

-   Area of Interest \[Step I -- II\]: Based on selected national park
    areas and adding a 10 kilometer buffer, a minimum bounding box \[α\]
    was created and clipped with the outline of the river Danube
    (derived from Corine Land Cover 2006). Further clipping tools \[β\]
    were applied to all additional data as an initial preparation step
    (Figure 2)
-   Land Cover Suitability Model \[Step IX\]: \[γ\] Input III and IV
    were transformed into shape files using the inbuilt #Polygonize
    function. Corine Landcover (2006) data was reclassified using the
    field calculator to group land use classes and assign respective
    index values. Similar processing was applied to Hansen Forestcover
    data (2000), extracting only areas of cover equal or higher 75 %.
    Sub-model IX was produced by using the functions #Merge Shapes to
    combine III with IV and #Rasterize

*Note: Land cover classes were grouped by possible lynx occurrence and
human activity. Although technically of older origin, information
related to forest cover values were integrated in order to indicate
habitat improvement and as a general example for joining spatial data
sets*

-   Habitat Suitability Model \[Step X\]: \[δ\] An Elevation Suitability
    Index was derived from the AsterDEM 2.0 \[VI\] and together with a
    Population Density Index \[V\] was integrated into the final habitat
    suitability model (Figure 3) by using the #Raster calculator

```

```
    Cover Suitability Model * Population Density Index * Elevation Suitability Index

*Note:Defining forest (\>= 75 % cover) as best suitable and using the
elevation data to reduce index values above assumed tree line is
conceptually related to habitat of deer as the main prey*

-   Potential Hunter Accessibility Model \[Step XI\]: Applying the
    #Terrain analysis tool \[ε\], a slope layer was extracted from the
    DEM data and combined \[η\] with a road distance layer, which was
    produced by processing rasterized OSM road data within the
    #Proximity function and index values assigned using #Reclassify grid
    values

```

```
    .
                          Slopelayer
    Road distance * ( 1 + ----------- )
                             100

-   Conservation Value Model \[Step XII\]: Is the result of the #Raster
    calculator function: (Figure 4)

```

```
    (Habitat Suitability Model * Hunter Accessibility Model)
    --------------------------------------------------------
                           2

*Note: The Hunter Accessibility Model shall indicate the decreasing
likelihood of hunters accessing the area by further distance to roads
and increasing slope*

![Figure 2, 3 and 4](./images/europe_lynx2.png)

## Conclusion

Looking at the final output (Figure 3), a plausible first potential
habitat analysis appeared to be successful, yet more importantly, basic
modeling itself turned out to be less difficult than initially expected.
Our choice to add a sub-model for hunter accessibility allowed us to
implement another dimension in terms of habitat risk assessment, which
can be simply nested into the already existing scenario and used to
determine protection necessities under aspects of e.g. infrastructure
development. However, some crucial habitat information, such as forest
structure (our highest habitat suitability) cannot be derived by
available data sets and in combination with the complex species
behavior, the result must therefore be understood as basic and
incomplete. Additional factors not implemented at this stage are road
mortality, terrain roughness and detailed prey occurrence.

Besides its open source, free available character, QGIS software has
been the subject of major developments in recent years. We made very
positive experience with the integration of the tool box, allowing the
use of various GRASS and SAGA tools, even for inexperienced users. No
compatibility issues occurred despite changing frequently between
different versions and the general absence of administrative
restrictions can be a powerful advantage when working intuitively with
data sets. We are looking forward seeing further improvements,
especially in regards to the integrated model builder.

## References

-   Kaczensky, P., Chapron, G.,von Avrx, M., Huber, D., Andrén, H. &
    Linnell, J. (December 2012): Status, management and distribution of
    large carnivores in Europe. Document European Commission.
-   Schadt, S., Revilla, E., Wiegand, T., Knauer, F., Kaczensky, P.,
    Breitenmoser, U., Bufka, L., Cerveny, J., Koubek, P., Huber, T.,
    Stanisa, C. & Trepl, L. (2002): Assessing the suitability of central
    European landscapes for the reintroduction of Eurasian lynx. Article
    Journal of Applied Ecology.
-   Salvatori, V. (2004): Conservation areas for large carnivores in the
    Carpathian Mountains. PhD Thesis.
-   Podgórski, T., Schmidt, K., Kowalczyk, R. & Gulczyñska, A. (2008):
    Microhabitat selection by Eurasian lynx and its implications for
    species conservation. Acta Theriologica 53: 97--110.
-   Boutros, D. (March 2002): Characterization and assessment of
    suitability of Eurasian lynx (Lynx lynx) den sites. KORA Report No.
    12e, Diploma thesis.

### Authors

Angela Dichte, Luca Ehrminger, Silvana Garcia Travesi Reyes, Tobias
Hoppe and David Winger are fourth semester students of the study program
International Forest Ecosystem Management B.Sc., Anne Gnilke
respectively German Forestry and Henri Hiltunen is an exchange student
from Mikkeli University of Applied Sciences, Finland. Prof. Mund is
lecturing GIS and Remote Sensing at HNE Eberswalde since 2010 and
provided guidance and technical support to the project.

Please contact Luca.Ehrminger(at)hnee.de, David.Winger(at)hnee.de, or
Prof.Dr.Jan-Peter Mund: Jan-Peter.Mund(at)hnee.de for further
information.
